---
title: ""
navigation:
  title: Daily activity
---

# **Daily activity**

- Your daily and weekly activity level is one the most underrated part of health and one of the best ways to increase your expenditure if fat loss is your goal.Here’s a graph showing the reduction in all cause mortality risk based on step count\:As you can see above, there is a massive reduction in risk from all-cause mortality by simply making sure you get around 6,000 steps per day.One thing to note is that this target is an average, which means if you have trouble hitting this on some days then you can make up for it with some longer walks on the weekend.You will get your own personal activity target based on your goals and your current lifestyle, but I would recommend that you start to think of ways you can increase your daily/weekly movement.I would also recommend getting a cheap step counter off of Amazon. This is because if you use your phone then it won’t count any steps you do whilst it isn’t in your pocket.This may come as a surprise, as quite often a lot of the discussion about health is centred around exercise.However, exercise only takes up a small percentage of our week.What we do for the rest of the time also matters, and below I’ll outline why…
  ## **Why our daily activity is so important for health**
  To start, let’s define daily activity. Daily activity includes things like:
  - Walking
  - Fidgeting
  - Taking the stairs
  - Hoovering
  - Gardening
    Basically anything that isn’t planned exercise.Next, let’s define some activity levels:
  - Sedentary is **less than 5,000 steps per day**
  - Low active is **5,000 to 7,499 steps per day**
  - Somewhat active is **7,500 to 9,999 steps per day**
  - Active is **more than** **10,000 steps per day**
    Now these numbers are obviously a bit generic. Some people may not walk around so much but they may fidget a lot or have other ways in which they are active, but they give us a rough idea to shoot for.So why is this so important?**FOR HEALTH**Being inactive for prolonged periods of time increases our risk for developing chronic diseases such as type 2 diabetes, heart disease, and certain types of cancer. In addition, not moving enough can lead to poor mental health, such as increased stress and anxiety. It can also lead to decreased energy levels and poor quality of sleep.
  - Adults who took 8,000 or more steps a day had a reduced risk of death over the following decade than those who only walked 4,000 steps a day.
  - Compared with people who took 4,000 steps a day, those who took 8,000 steps a day at the start of the study had a 50% lower risk of dying from any cause during follow-up. People who took 12,000 steps a day had a 65% lower risk of dying than those who took only 4,000.
    The interesting thing is that step intensity did not seem to impact the risk of mortality. Only an increased number of steps per day was associated with a reduced risk of death.It’s also important to note that exercise **does not** undo the damage done from long periods of sitting.**SO HOW MANY STEPS?**&#x49; would recommend:
  - A minimum of 7,000 per day (49,000 per week) for health
  - 10,000 per day (70,000 per week) for fat loss (you can build up to this)
    Also, you don’t have to hit these numbers **every** day. A better way to think about it is to aim for a weekly average, that way you can fit it into your life in a way that works for you.For example, you may be able to hit 6,000 during the weekdays and then go for longer walks on the weekend, bumping your numbers up to 10,000 which would make your weekly average 7,143 steps.
  ## **Why daily activity is the best thing to focus on for fat loss**
  When fat loss is our goal, we need to create a deficit so that our bodies can tap into our energy reserves (body fat).The two main ways we can achieve this are by:
  - Manipulating the amount of calories we consume
  - Manipulating our energy expenditure
    The great thing about this is we can tweak both of these to suit our preferences.For example, if you don’t want to drop your calories lower, you can increase your energy expenditure.Or if you don’t mind eating a little less in terms of calories and bumping your veg intake up, then you can do that.This way you can find the balance you would like.The reason we do this via daily activity and not exercise is because again, exercise only contributes a small percentage oof our week and therefore a small amount of possible energy expenditure.(note: **DO NOT** use activity trackers to tell you how many calories you have burned. They are **WILDLY** inaccurate)Not only that, but exercising more is much more likely to make us hungrier, therefore making it harder to not overeat.Increasing your daily activity by increasing how much you move is not only great for your physical and mental health, but it’s also low impact and has a lower barrier to entry. You don’t have to get ready, go to the gym and commit an hour to it. You can simply move a bit more throughout the day.The other reason we want to keep an eye on our activity level when fat loss is our goal is because as we get leaner our body will start to try and preserve energy by making us move less throughout the day which then means we don’t use as much energy.(this is why people think starvation mode exists. It doesn’t. But our body **does** move less as we lower our calories and start to get to lower body fat levels)Having a step count means that we maintain a minimum level of activity, even when our body is trying to stop us from doing so.
  ## **Tips to help increase your daily activity**
  So how can we make sure that we’re moving enough and how can we increase our daily activity levels without it taking over our lives?Firstly, this is the benefit of tracking your steps. You don’t have to obsess over them for the rest of your life, but occasionally having a metric you can check on is a super useful way of making sure you’re not under-moving.Most phones have step counters on these days, but I would recommend getting a cheap watch/step counter as your phone may under-report (if you don’t have it in your pocket it won’t record your steps).Ways of increasing your daily steps include:
  - Parking further away from things if you drive
  - Walk instead of taking the bus small distances
  - Take the stairs instead of the lift or walk up the escalator
  - Get off the bus a stop early
  - Go for a 10-15 minute walk after lunch (good for digestion too)
  - If you work at a desk, set a timer to go off every so often to remind you to get up and move around
    These are just a few ideas. Feel free to come up with your own!The point is to make sure that we become aware of how much we’re moving and make small steps to keep it up, or at least at a minimal level and ensure we don’t suffer the negative health consequences of inactivity.
